Data generation pipeline
========================

View On GitHub

The data generation pipeline uses JBrowse perl scripts to output
efficient JSON representations of GFF and FASTA data. The JBrowse perl
scripts will be automatically installed by the ``apollo deploy``
command, but can also be installed using ``install_jbrowse.sh``.

Running these scripts outputs

-  WebApollo/bin
-  WebApollo/src/perl5
-  WebApollo/extlib

Where the bin/ directory contains the normal jbrowse perl scripts such
as prepare-refseqs.pl and flatfile-to-json.pl. Refer to the
`troubleshooting guide <Troubleshooting.md>`__ if these files are not
outputted.

DNA track setup with prepare-refseqs.pl
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step to setup the genome browser is to load the reference
genome data. We'll use the ``prepare-refseqs.pl`` script to output to
the data directory that we configured in config.properties or
config.xml.

::

    $ bin/prepare-refseqs.pl --fasta pyu_data/scf1117875582023.fa --out $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR

WebApollo track setup with add-webapollo-plugin.pl
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After initializing the data directory, add the WebApollo plugin tracks
using the ``add-webapollo-plugin.pl``. It takes a 'trackList.json' as an
argument.

::

    $ client/apollo/bin/add-webapollo-plugin.pl -i $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/trackList.json

GFF3 pre-processing with split\_gff\_by\_source.pl
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generating data from GFF3 works best by having a separate GFF3 per
source type. If your GFF3 has all source types in the same file, as with
the Pythium ultimum sample, then use the
``tools/data/split_gff_by_source.pl`` script. We'll output the split
GFF3 to some temporary directory (e.g. ``split_gff``).

::

    $ mkdir split_gff
    $ tools/data/split_gff_by_source.pl -i pyu_data/scf1117875582023.gff -d split_gff

If we look at the contents of ``WEB_APOLLO_SAMPLE_DIR/split_gff``, we
can see we have the following files:

::

    $ ls split_gff
    blastn.gff  est2genome.gff  protein2genome.gff  repeatrunner.gff
    blastx.gff  maker.gff       repeatmasker.gff    snap_masked.gff

We will load each file and create the appropriate tracks in the
following steps.

GFF3 track setup with gene/transcript/exon/CDS/polypeptide with flatfile-to-json.pl
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We'll start off by loading ``maker.gff`` from the Pythium ultimum data.
We need to handle that file a bit differently than the rest of the files
since the GFF represents the features as gene, transcript, exons, and
CDSs.

::

    $ bin/flatfile-to-json.pl --gff split_gff/maker.gff --type mRNA --trackLabel maker --out $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR

We can also add styling to the track by changing the subfeatureClasses
and className to use custom WebApollo CSS classes:

::

    $ bin/flatfile-to-json.pl --gff split_gff/maker.gff \
      --arrowheadClass trellis-arrowhead  \
      --subfeatureClasses '{"wholeCDS": null, "CDS":"brightgreen-80pct", "UTR": "darkgreen-60pct", "exon":"container-100pct"}' \
      --className container-16px --type mRNA --trackLabel maker --out $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR

See the `Customizing features <Data_loading.md#customizing-features>`__
section for more information on CSS styles.

GFF3 with match/match\_part features with flatfile-to-json.pl
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your track uses match and match\_part types instead of
gene->mRNA->exon, you can load the track using the --type match
argument.

We'll start off with ``blastn`` results as an example.

::

    $bin/flatfile-to-json.pl --gff split_gff/blastn.gff \
      --arrowheadClass webapollo-arrowhead \
      --subfeatureClasses '{"match_part": "darkblue-80pct"}'
      --type match
      --className container-10px --trackLabel blastn --out $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR

Generate searchable name index
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once data tracks have been created, you can generate a searchable index
of names using the generate-names.pl script:

::

    $ bin/generate-names.pl --verbose --out $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR

This script creates an index of sequence names and feature names in
order to enable auto-completion in the navigation text box. If you have
some tracks that have millions of features, consider using
"--completionLimit 0" to disable the autocompletion which will save
time.

BAM data
^^^^^^^^

BAM files are natively supported so the file can be read (in chunks)
directly from the server with no preprocessing.

To use this, copy the BAM+BAM index to $JBROWSE\_DATA\_DIR, and then use
the add-bam-track.pl to add the file to the tracklist.

::

    $ mkdir $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/bam
    $ cp pyu_data/simulated-sorted.bam $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/bam
    $ cp pyu_data/simulated-sorted.bam.bai $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/bam
    $ bin/add-bam-track.pl --bam_url bam/simulated-sorted.bam \
       --label simulated_bam --key "simulated BAM" -i $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/trackList.json

Note: the ``bam_url`` parameter is a relative URL to the
$JBROWSE\_DATA\_DIR. It is not a filepath!

BigWig data
^^^^^^^^^^^

WebApollo also has native support for BigWig files (.bw), so no extra
processing of these files is required either.

To use this, copy the BigWig data into the WebApollo data directory and
then use the add-bw-track.pl.

::

    $ mkdir $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/bigwig
    $ cp pyu_data/*.bw $JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/bigwig

Now we need to add the BigWig track.

::

    $bin/add-bw-track.pl --bw_url bigwig/simulated-sorted.coverage.bw \ `
      --label simulated_bw --key "simulated BigWig"`</span>

Note: the ``bw_url`` paramter is a relative URL to the
$JBROWSE\_DATA\_DIR. It is not a filepath!

Customizing different annotation types (advanced)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After running ``add-webapollo-plugin.pl``, the annotation track will be
added to ``trackList.json``. To change how the different annotation
types look in the "User-created annotation" track, you'll need to update
the mapping of the annotation type to the appropriate CSS class. This
data resides in ``trackList.json`` after running
``add-webapollo-plugin.pl``. You'll need to modify the JSON entry whose
label is ``Annotations``. Of particular interest is the
``alternateClasses`` element. Let's look at that default element:

::

    "alternateClasses": {
        "pseudogene" : {
           "className" : "light-purple-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "tRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "snRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "snoRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "ncRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "miRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "rRNA" : {
           "className" : "brightgreen-80pct",
           "renderClassName" : "gray-center-30pct"
        },
        "repeat_region" : {
           "className" : "magenta-80pct"
        },
        "transposable_element" : {
           "className" : "blue-ibeam",
           "renderClassName" : "blue-ibeam-render"
        }
    },

For each annotation type, you can override the default class mapping for
both ``className`` and ``renderClassName`` to use another CSS class.
Check out the `Customizing
features <Data_loading.md#customizing-features>`__ section for more
information on customizing the CSS classes.

Customizing features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The visual appearance of biological features in WebApollo (and JBrowse)
is handled by CSS stylesheets with HTMLFeatures tracks. Every feature
and subfeature is given a default CSS "class" that matches a default CSS
style in a CSS stylesheet. These styles are are defined in
``src/main/webapps/jbrowse/plugins/WebApollo/jbrowse/track_styles.css``
and
``src/main/webapps/jbrowse/plugins/WebApollo/css/webapollo_track_styles.css``.
Additional styles are also defined in these files, and can be used by
explicitly specifying them in the --className, --subfeatureClasses,
--renderClassname, or --arrowheadClass parameters to
flatfile-to-json.pl. See example
`above <#Load_GFF3_with_gene/transcript/exon/CDS/polypeptide_features>`__

WebApollo differs from JBrowse in some of it's styling, largely in order
to help with feature selection, edge-matching, and dragging. WebApollo
by default uses invisible container elements (with style class names
like "container-16px") for features that have children, so that the
children are fully contained within the parent feature. This is paired
with another styled element that gets rendered *within* the feature but
underneath the subfeatures, and is specified by the --renderClassname
argument to flatfile-to-json.pl. Exons are also by default treated as
special invisible containers, which hold styled elements for UTRs and
CDS.

It is relatively easy to add other stylesheets that have custom style
classes that can be used as parameters to flatfile-to-json.pl. For
example, you can create ``$JBROWSE_DATA_DIR/custom_track_styles.css``
which contains two new styles:

::

    .gold-90pct, 
    .plus-gold-90pct, 
    .minus-gold-90pct  {
        background-color: gold;
        height: 90%;
        top: 5%;
        border: 1px solid gray;
    }

    .dimgold-60pct, 
    .plus-dimgold-60pct, 
    .minus-dimgold-60pct  {
        background-color: #B39700;
        height: 60%;
        top: 20%;
    }

In this example, two subfeature styles are defined, and the *top*
property is being set to (100%-height)/2 to assure that the subfeatures
are centered vertically within their parent feature. When defining new
styles for features, it is important to specify rules that apply to
plus-\ *stylename* and minus-\ *stylename* in addition to *stylename*,
as WebApollo adds the "plus-" or "minus-" to the class of the feature if
the the feature has a strand orientation.

You need to tell WebApollo where to find these styles by modifying the
JBrowse config or the plugin config, e.g. by adding this to the
trackList.json

::

       "css" : "sample_data/custom_track_styles.css" 

Or you can also instead add the custom\_track\_styles.css to
``src/main/webapp/plugins/WebApollo/css/`` and then use the @import
command in ``src/main/webapp/jbrowse/plugins/WebApollo/css/main.css``.
Then you may use these new styles when loading tracks to
flatfile-to-json.pl, for example:

::

    bin/flatfile-to-json.pl --gff WEB_APOLLO_SAMPLE_DIR/split_gff/maker.gff 
        --getSubfeatures --type mRNA --trackLabel maker --webApollo 
        --subfeatureClasses '{"CDS":"gold-90pct", "UTR": "dimgold-60pct"}' 

Bulk loading annotations to the user annotation track
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

GFF3
^^^^

You can use the
``tools/data/add_transcripts_from_gff3_to_annotations.pl`` script to
bulk load GFF3 files with transcripts to the user annotation track.
Let's say we want to load our ``maker.gff`` transcripts.

::

    $ tools/data/add_transcripts_from_gff3_to_annotations.pl \
        -U localhost:8080/WebApollo -u web_apollo_admin -p web_apollo_admin \
        -i WEB_APOLLO_SAMPLE_DIR/split_gff/maker.gff

The default options should be handle GFF3 most files that contain genes,
transcripts, and exons.

You can still use this script even if the GFF3 file that you are loading
does not contain transcripts and exon types. Let's say we want to load
``match`` and ``match_part`` features as transcripts and exons
respectively. We'll use the ``blastn.gff`` file as an example.

::

    $ tools/data/add_transcripts_from_gff3_to_annotations.pl \
       -U localhost:8080/WebApollo -u web_apollo_admin -p web_apollo_admin \
       -i split_gff/blastn.gff -t match -e match_part

Look at the script's help (``-h``) for all available options.

Congratulations, you're done configuring WebApollo!
