Troubleshooting
---------------


Tomcat memory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

View On GitHub

Many times the default memory allowance is too low. The memory
requirements of WebApollo will depend on the the size of your genome and
how many instances of Web Apollo you host in the same Tomcat instance,
but in general, we recommend at least 1g for the heap size and 256m for
the permgen size as a starting point. Suggested settings are:

::

    export CATALINA_OPTS="-Xms512m -Xmx1g -XX:+CMSClassUnloadingEnabled -XX:+CMSPermGenSweepingEnabled -XX:+UseConcMarkSweepGC -XX:MaxPermSize=256m"

To use this setting, edit the setenv.sh script in
``$TOMCAT_BIN_DIR/setenv.sh`` where ``$TOMCAT_BIN_DIR`` is where the
directory where the Tomcat binaries reside.

Tomcat permissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When deploying your war file to tomcat or another web application
server, you may run into permissions problems in your annotations
directory or your web application directory. Tomcat on many production
systems will typically belong to a user and group called something like
'tomcat'. Make sure that that user can read in the tomcat "webapps"
directory (where you placed your war file) and write into the
annotations and any other relevant directory (e.g. tomcat/logs). As
such, it is sometimes helpful to add the user you logged-in as to the
same group as your tomcat user and set group write permissions for both.

http://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-7.0-doc/security-howto.html#Non-Tomcat\_settings

No refseqs when opening up selectTrack.jsp
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This problem often indicates that credentials for the
LocalDbUserAuthentication script were not initialized properly because
only tracks that the user has permissions for will be shown. Please
refer to the `quick install guide <Quick_start_guide.md>`__ for details
on these steps, paying attention particularly to the
set\_user\_track\_permissions.pl script which sets the permissions for
which which refseqs a user can access.

Getting logged out when entering JBrowse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This often indicates that the add-webapollo-plugin.pl script wasn't run
properly, which will update JBrowse's configuration and load the Web
Apollo plugin. See the `data generation <Data_loading.md>`__ for details
on this step.

Errors running JBrowse scripts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

e.g. "Can't locate Hash/Merge.pm in @INC" or "Can't locate JBlibs.pm in @INC"
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If are trying to run the jbrowse binaries but get these sorts of errors,
try ``install_jbrowse.sh`` which will initialize as many pre-requisites
as possible including JBLibs and other JBrowse dependencies.

Errors during apollo deploy or install\_jbrowse.sh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

e.g. "cd: src/main/webapp/jbrowse: No such file or directory"
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If you get this error, then you may need to re-run ``apollo deploy`` or
even do a ``apollo clean-all && apollo deploy``. You may also want to
review the `developers guide <Developer.md>`__ for how to create a
precompiled package.

Postgres authentication setup
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several different types of authentication methods that are
used for postgres and sometimes the defaults must be customized to be
used for your system.

If you get permission denied errors, make sure to review the official
PostgreSQL documentation for
`pg\_hba.conf <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/auth-pg-hba-conf.html>`__:

The important thing to understand is that there are different types of
access methods defined in the pg\_hba.conf file:

-  local settings (i.e. when you are accessing the database on the
   command line)
-  host settings (i.e. when you are accessing the database over a
   socket)

With webapollo, the "host settings" are required for runtime operation,
but the "local settings" are also important during setup, for example
when initializing the database with the user\_database\_postgresql.sql.

Therefore, it is also important to understand the authentication
methods:

-  peer - allows shell based logins without a password (can be used for
   local logins)
-  ident - based off of operating system logins (similar to shell based
   login but used for host/remote access. can't be used with
   non-operating system postgres usernames)
-  md5 - basic encrypted password based-logins (recommended for
   non-operating system usernames)

An ideal pg\_hba.conf for WebApollo might have a line for our special
local login for the web\_apollo\_users\_admin user, as well as
permitting md5 logins over host:

::

    local   all             web_apollo_users_admin                  md5
    # IPv4 local connections:
    host    all             all             127.0.0.1/32            md5
    # IPv6 local connections:
    host    all             all             ::1/128                 md5

Chado export
~~~~~~~~~~~~

You must install chado to use the Chado export feature, and you must
also set it up for your organism. If, after setting up chado, and you
receive this error:

::

    java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: entity for parameter binding cannot be null
        at org.hibernate.impl.AbstractQueryImpl.resolveEntityName(AbstractQueryImpl.java:587)
        at org.hibernate.impl.AbstractQueryImpl.setEntity(AbstractQueryImpl.java:581)
        at org.gmod.gbol.simpleObject.io.impl.HibernateHandler.getAllFeaturesBySourceFeature(HibernateHandler.java:166)
        at org.bbop.apollo.web.dataadapter.chado.ChadoIO.deleteFeatures(ChadoIO.java:164)
        at org.bbop.apollo.web.dataadapter.chado.ChadoIO.writeFeatures(ChadoIO.java:66)
        at org.bbop.apollo.web.dataadapter.chado.ChadoJEDatabaseIO.writeFeatures(ChadoJEDatabaseIO.java:31)
        at org.bbop.apollo.web.dataadapter.chado.ChadoDataAdapter.execute(ChadoDataAdapter.java:134)
        at org.bbop.apollo.web.dataadapter.chado.ChadoDataAdapter.write(ChadoDataAdapter.java:68)

Then you must also make sure to import your genome into Chado. Refer to
the configuration guide for this note on `Chado
export <Configure.md#important-note-for-chado-export>`__.

Differences between JBrowse and WebApollo
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The "linkTemplate" track configuration parameter in JBrowse is
overridden by WebApollo's feature edge matcher and drag and drop
functions. It is recommended to use menuTemplate instead.
